Making Verification Compelling - blog post (#3)
dafny-lang/blog: _posts/2023-04-19-making-verification-compelling-visual-verification-feedback-for-dafny.markdown

With its Java-like syntax and good type inference, Dafny has [2k stars on GitHub](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny).
Dafny is being used both academic circles to [teach formal reasoning](http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~scd/Dafny_Material/Lectures.pdf), as well as in industrial projects like [IronFleet](https://github.com/microsoft/Ironclad/blob/main/ironfleet/README.md) and [IronClad projects](https://github.com/microsoft/Ironclad/blob/main/ironfleet/README.md), as part of the [AWS Encryption SDK](https://github.com/aws/aws-encryption-sdk-dafny) and as the model for the [Amazon Verified Permissions](https://aws.amazon.com/verified-permissions/).

Under the hood, Dafny reasons about programs, and can not only prove the absence of run-time exceptions, but also invariants and specific properties relating inputs and outputs.

### A quick introduction to Dafny

By now, you might want to know what does it mean to reason about programs _mathematically_ to avoid bugs that tests might not cover. It's your lucky day, I made an animation to explain the process. Here is an example of an unoptimized program that computes the euclidian division in Dafny. To go to the next step, click "Next".

> {% include verification-compelling-intro.html %}

Author: I removed `To go to the next step, click "Next"` and added `The Euclidian is the regular division you learned at school, and the result are the quotient and the remainder.`

  So basically, it was impossible to know things about assertions that are not underlined in red as errors.
* **Are there still assertions to prove in my current method?**
  Professional programmers often wrote methods longer than could be displayed on the screen at once. Because postconditions are written at the beginning of a method, such users often needed to scroll back up to see if they finally proved it. Having no contextual information about the entire method verification status was painful.

So many questions that would block not only novice Dafny users, but also expert ones. Using Dafny myself, and supported by the entire Dafny team, I felt the strong need to do something about it.

## Gutter-icon-based verification feedback

Gutter icons brought the first solution in that they offered easy-to-read and enhanced contextual feedback.
You might remember the animated screenshot of [our previous blog post](/blog/2023/03/03/dafny-4-released/):

![Dafny 4 IDE features](/blog/assets/images/Dafny4IDEFeatures.gif)

> I'm now going to explain in detail what is happening on the left of the code (the _gutter_), and how I designed it and especially how it answered many of the questions users were asking, sometimes unconciously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'm now going to explain in detail what is happening on the left of the code (the _gutter_), and how I designed it and especially how it answered many of the questions users were asking, sometimes unconsciously.
```

how can I leverage the gutter area to display verification feedback instead of usual test feedback? 

While thinking about how to display verification feedback in the gutter, I established some principles that guided us during the design of both the icons and the user experience:

* **Verified is visible but the least distracting:** The icons for verified code should provide a simple positive feedback.
* **Accessibility:** The icons should not just have colors, but also easily recognizable shapes, so that color-blind people could still benefit from them.
* **Compatibility with themes:** The icon colors should be adequate both in light and dark mode.
* **Compatibility with modes:** The icons should work both if the user triggers verification on save, or if verification is triggered each time users type something
* **Context-awareness:** The icons should not just convey the verification status of a single line, but, where appropriate, they may also convey verification feedback about the surrounding context.
* **Past-awareness:** Icons indicating ongoing computation should still display previous verification status, so that it is not lost.

> * **No ambiguity:** The icons should be simple, straightforward, and not be ambiguous when looked from the side of the field of vision, so that users can focus on their code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Clarity:** The icons should be simple, straightforward, and unambiguous even in users' peripheral vision, so that users can focus on their code.
```

* **A circle with a check mark for partially proved assertions.** [Figure 1](#fig_static_icons_dark_light), line 11 and line 18.
    While designing the icons, we got access to not only errors and declarations, <img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example1.png" alt="Dafny gutter icons on dark theme" width="45%" style="float:left;width:25px;height:35px;object-fit:none;object-position:-7px -588px;margin:3px"/>  but also to all the individual assertions. When Dafny finds an assertion it cannot prove, it will report it, assume it, and relaunch the verification process, up to five times per declaration. Therefore if, before the fifth time, it was able to prove that a declaration is correct, it means that every assertion not tagged with an error is partially proved.
    This is especially useful in the context of verification debugging, when one tries to copy and rewrite assertions towards the top of the declaration, manually applying the [weakest precondition calculus](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging).

>     Not surprisingly, it solved the issue of users wondering if Dafny stopped at the first error or was able to prove the remaining. I also decided to not create an equivalent of this icon in a verified context, to keep the fully verified feedback as simple as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As expected, it solved the issue of users wondering if Dafny stopped at the first error or was able to prove the remaining. I also decided to not create an equivalent of this icon in a verified context, to keep the fully verified feedback as simple as possible.
```

#### Dynamic icons

> Having icons for describing the verification status statically is great, but I found a clear benefit of using dynamic icons when displaying feedback. Typically, after looking at the verification diagnostics, users write more code or specifications, and then wait for verification to happen again. Verification can sometimes take dozens of seconds for a single file. so waiting for the entire verification of a file before updating icons would definitely not provide a good user experience...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having icons for describing the verification status statically is great, but I found a clear benefit of using dynamic icons when displaying feedback. Typically, after looking at the verification diagnostics, users write more code or specifications, and then wait for verification to happen again. Verification can sometimes take dozens of seconds for a single file, so waiting for the entire verification of a file before updating icons would definitely not provide a good user experience...
```

I could just have removed verification icons while Dafny is verifying declarations. You can thank me, I did not chose this easy path, because I think that this would cause not only a disturbing blinking effect when verification is fast, but also make the user not benefit from immediate comparison with the previous status. In the [weakest precondition calculus](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging), I found it is helpful to see the red rectangle to "move up", as it often means that someone is bringing an error closer to the hypotheses. Erasing the intermediate feedback would put more strain on vision processing because users would have to visually re-align the icons and the (usually indented) code.

<div id="fig_dynamic_gutter_icons"></div>
[<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example-dynamic.png" alt="Dafny dynamic gutter icons" style="display:block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:500px;max-width:95%;"/>](/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example-dynamic.png)

> <div style="text-align:center;font-style:italic">

Reviewer: To aid the textual description of the animated zig-zag lines, can we make this image animated too?

* **The "obsolete" or "stale" phase.** This phase uses static and dimmed versions of the icons in the "verifying" phase. This phase is visible in screenshots A and E of [Figure 2](#fig_dynamic_gutter_icons), Dafny recognizes that something is new or has changed and that it is
    simply parsing and resolving the new code, but hasn't started verification yet.
* **The "unresolved" phase.** This phase uses gray scale versions of the "obsolete" icons, except for parsing and resolution errors which are indicated by red triangles containing an exclamation point, like D of [Figure 2](#fig_dynamic_gutter_icons).

I had to solve many challenges to ensure these icons provide the most adequate feedback.
For example, as soon as some input is entered, before parsing even occurs,
Dafny already migrates those icons according to string edits.
I also found the lightning metaphor to be adequate to provide the sense of "verification" on the side of the vision field without hiding the previous verification status.

> However, I observed that if we just took the rectangle for error and put a lightning on it (yellow or transparent), it would just not be visible to the side of the vision field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, I observed that if we just took the rectangle for error and put a lightning on it (yellow or transparent), it became hard-to-see in peripheral vision.
```

> This is especially more important given that I modified Dafny to give per-method feedback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially important given that I modified Dafny to give per-method feedback.
```

This is why the red rectangle is split in screenshots E and F of [Figure 2](#fig_dynamic_gutter_icons), as if the error was about to "go away".

> Among all the dynamic icons, note that the topmost part of [Figure 2](#fig_dynamic_gutter_icons) is less distinct than for code in error context. Without more information about the new code, I preferred the dynamic icons to reflect a kind of default hypothesis that previously verified code will probably also be verified.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean here by "the topmost part" - can you specify which line(s)?

#### Implementation details and cosmetics

<!--Things get deep now. Feel free to take a break if you really want to read this, or [skip to the next section](#enhancing-positive-and-negative-feedback) to learn more about things other than gutter icons.-->

To render static and dynamic icons, I used a z-buffer mechanism with clever codes for each icons.
I also have had special icons designed for the start and end of declarations with errors so that if flows nicely with verified code (for example <img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example1.png" alt="Dafny gutter icons on dark theme" width="45%" style="width:25px;height:24px;object-fit:none;object-position:-7px -307px;margin:3px"/>)
In real-time feedback, I also delayed the display of gutter icons by 2 seconds in the presence of parse or resolution errors, to avoid icons blinking when typing fast.
Finally, I ensured that the scroll bar itself reflects gutter icons, so that it's possible to see at a glance if the entire file is verified, and if not, where to scroll.

<div id="enhancing-positive-and-negative-feedback"></div>

## Enhanced positive and negative hover feedback

> Congratulations for reading until here! So far, you already have a sense on how the interface of Dafny is almost gamified with its on heads-up display or HUD, which contributes to making it delightful.

Reviewer: nit: I'm not sure I would think of this interface as a HUD, but it's certainly an immersive UI experience.

The gutter icons enhanced the user experience, but this was not enough. I found that I could further enhance the existing hover messages to provide useful insights and shortcuts. Let's compare before/after:

<div id="fig_previous_diagnostics"></div>
[<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-a.png" alt="Dafny previous hover messages" style="display:block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:500px;max-width:95%;"/>](/blog//blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-a.png)
<div style="text-align:center;font-style:italic;margin-bottom:2em;">

> Fig 3a. Previous diagnostics, highlighting and hovering. Although diagnostics are clickable, often users only need to get the failing related code immediately without changing context, so this is distracting.

Reviewer: nit: clarity

```suggestion
Fig 3a. Previous diagnostics, highlighting and hovering. By clicking on a diagnostic to get more information, the failing related code would be scrolled into view, distracting the user with an unnecessary context change. 
```

Moreover, no further help is available to solve verification issues.
</div>
<div id="fig_new_diagnostics"></div>
[<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-b.png" alt="Dafny previous hover messages" style="display:block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:500px;max-width:95%;"/>](/blog//blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-b.png)
<div style="text-align:center;font-style:italic;margin-bottom:2em;">
Fig 3b. New diagnostics, highlighting and hovering. Note that now failing postconditions are underlined as well (in reddish orange) and have a specific error message complementary to the error message at the return path.

> The word "<b style="color:#3794ff">Error</b>" points to the very useful page of <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging">verification debugging when verification fails</a>. All related code snippets are visible and copyable on hover. The assertion number and number of resources are given.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The word "<b style="color:#3794ff">Error</b>" points to the very useful page of <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging">verification debugging when verification fails</a>. All related code snippets are visible and copyable on hover. The assertion number and number of resource units are given.
```

</div>
<div id="fig_method_summary"></div>
[<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-c.png" alt="Dafny previous hover messages" style="display:block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:500px;max-width:95%;"/>](/blog//blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/hover-c.png)
<div style="text-align:center;font-style:italic;margin-bottom:2em;">

> Fig 4. Method summary on hover. Note the icon that points to <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow">verification debugging when verification is slow</a> if the number of resource units exceeds a threshold (currently 10M). The costlier assertion batch's first line is given, which is useful if all assertions are verified separatedly using <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert"><code>{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}</code></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fig 4. Method summary on hover. Note the icon that links to <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow">the verification debugging section of the Dafny manual</a> if the number of resource units exceeds a threshold (currently 10M). The costlier assertion batch's first line number is given, which is useful if all assertions are verified separately using <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert"><code>{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}</code></a>
```

</div>

One aspect of program verification is that a single error might cover two or more places in the code. For example, post-conditions are asserted at every exit point of a declaration. Therefore, if this assertion fails, it fails on an exit point, and for the particular post-condition.
[Figure 3a](#fig_previous_diagnostics) shows that the error was never reported on the post-condition itself before (top image). Following user feedback, on [Figure 3b](#fig_new_diagnostics) I made the error visible on post-conditions, using a red-orange squiggly line in-code &mdash; to indicate it is a secondary error &mdash; and using the regular error icon in the gutter.
Moreover, because hovering is one of first way users can discover features, I added the following improvements to the hover experience, as shown in the bottom of [Figure 3b](#fig_new_diagnostics):

> * We quote the exact code portions that Dafny could not prove

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We quote the exact code portions that Dafny could not prove.
```

* On the <b style="color:#3794ff">Error</b> keyword, the usual color for links, I added a link to documentation we also wrote about how to [fix failing assertions](https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-verification-debugging).
* "This is assertion #1 of 2" explains how many assertions there are and where is this assertion roughly located in verification, which proved to be useful for [splitting verification in smaller tasks using annotations](https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches).

> * "Resource usage: 9K RU" provides a deterministic metric on how many _resource units_ (RU) the solver used to reach this verification result. Resource units do not fluctuate like time would on multiple iterations, or when running on a different computer, although we found that both are correlated.

Reviewer: nit: RUs are still nondeterministic w.r.t. solver seeds. Can we instead say that resource usage is a "_more_ deterministic metric [than elapsed verification time]", or something to that effect?

> * Hovering a _proved_ assertion reveals similar insights, with a positive message instead of an error, such as "Success: The divisior is never zero".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Hovering over a _proved_ assertion reveals similar insights, with a positive message instead of an error, such as "Success: The divisor is never zero".
```

> * On hovering the line containing the method, if there are no other hovered assertions, I display a summary of verification as in [Figure 4](#fig_method_summary). This summary provides a link to the notion of [assertion batches]((https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches)) that helps splitting verification in smaller tasks, as well as a unicode warning icon `/!\` with a link to documentation to [fix verification when verification uses more than 10 million RU](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow), a threshold I set by experience.

Reviewer: By "line containing the method" did you mean "method containing the line"?

```suggestion
* On hovering over the method containing the line, if there are no other hovered assertions, I display a summary of verification as in [Figure 4](#fig_method_summary). This summary provides a link to the notion of [assertion batches]((https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches)) that helps splitting verification in smaller tasks, as well as a unicode warning icon `/!\` with a link to documentation to [fix verification when verification uses more than 10 million RU](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow), a threshold I set by experience.
```

Author: > By "line containing the method" did you mean "method containing the line"?

It was actually "line containing the method name". Thanks for pointing it out!

* To identify which assertion batches are the slowest and need more work, especially when using the annotation [`{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert), I displayed the top 3 most expensive assertion batches and line numbers.

# Summary

> I explained why Dafny, how Dafny works, how gutter icons enhance the verification experience, how I designed the icons, and how I enhanced verification feedback using suitable hover messages. This, I believe, made the Dafny verification experience more accessible, more positive, and more enjoyable, for both new and existing users.

Reviewer: Can you clarify what you mean by "why Dafny"?

The story is not finished, but I hope that you enjoyed this first chapter!

# Acknowledgments

> Adrianna Corona, for co-designing the icons and the user experience, while keeping the user needs in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adrianna Corona, for co-designing the icons and the user experience, while keeping the users' needs in mind.
```
